---
title: South African Makerspaces-The Starting Point for Manufacturing
description: Most of us have a yearning to create something. 
date: April 12, 2023
author: Henry Levine
imageUrl: /icons/Website News_South African makerspaces_Hero banner.jpg
categories: Events
filter: events
---

Watching other people on YouTube making stuff fuels the statement: “I could make what they make if I also had access to the tools and machines.” That has always been the challenge for most of us, however, not any more now that makerspaces are being established. A maker space is a collaborative workshop that offers access to industrial tools and machines, such as welding equipment, engineering machinery, 3D printers, laser cutters, and CNC machines. They provide a space for entrepreneurs, innovators, and makers to work on projects, share ideas, and learn new skills. Makerspaces are not just about the tools and machines; they are also about the community of like-minded makers and manufacturers that they establish.<br/><br/>

Makerspaces offer a unique opportunity for entrepreneurs, manufacturers and makers in South Africa, especially those looking to start a business. These spaces provide access to expensive equipment and tools that would otherwise be out of reach for most entrepreneurs. This access allows them to prototype and manufacture products at a fraction of the cost, which is essential for start-ups looking to gain a foothold in the market.<br/><br/>

Makerspaces are essential in filling the void created by the lack of technical colleges and the over-focus on trends that are not applicable to the South African economy. They provide a starting point for manufacturing, which is crucial for the country's economic growth. By providing access to tools and machines, makerspaces enable entrepreneurs to manufacture products and create jobs. In South Africa, the manufacturing sector has been in decline, and the country has become increasingly reliant on imports. Makerspaces can help reverse this trend by providing a platform for entrepreneurs to create products locally. This not only reduces the country's reliance on imports, but also creates jobs and stimulates the economy. For many entrepreneurs in South Africa, starting a business can be challenging due to the high cost of equipment and tools. Makerspaces provide a solution to this problem by offering access to these resources at a fraction of the cost. This allows entrepreneurs to develop prototypes and test their ideas before investing in expensive equipment.<br/><br/>

Makerspaces also provide a platform for entrepreneurs to learn new skills and connect with other like-minded individuals. This can be invaluable in the early stages of a business, where networking and mentorship are essential. Makerspaces offer a supportive community of makers and manufacturers that can provide advice, guidance, and feedback. Makerspaces are relatively new in South Africa, but they are already making a significant impact. They have the potential to transform the country's manufacturing sector and drive economic growth. However, to achieve this, makerspaces need to be more widely available and accessible.<br/><br/>

There needs to be a fundamental change in the way manufacturing is viewed, adopted and spread throughout South Africa. It starts with encouraging makers and manufacturers to get their hands dirty. The excuse that I was not taught how to do that ended some 10 years ago. Most of us have heard of the university on Youtube. There are most certainly products that will always be imported, but there are as many products that could and should be made in South Africa. The government can play a crucial role. To be precise. Municipal Government. Where ever, manufacturing thrives, so do other supporting industries.<br/><br/>

Makerspaces are a game-changer for entrepreneurs and makers in South Africa. They offer access to industrial tools and machines, establish a community of like-minded individuals, and provide a starting point for manufacturing. Makerspaces fill in the void created by the lack of technical colleges and the over-focus on trends that are not applicable to the South African economy. Makerspaces are essential in driving economic growth and reducing the country's reliance on imports. They provide a platform for entrepreneurs to start businesses, create jobs, and stimulate the economy. The future of makerspaces in South Africa is bright, and with more individuals exploring the manufacturing sector, they could transform the country's manufacturing sector.